[[src]](https://github.com/ghc/ghc/tree/master/compiler/typecheck/TcPat.hs)

(c) The University of Glasgow 2006
(c) The GRASP/AQUA Project, Glasgow University, 1992-1998


TcPat: Typechecking patterns


# External interface


# PatEnv, PatCtxt, LetBndrSpec


# Binders


### Note: Subsumption check at pattern variables

When we come across a variable with a type signature, we need to do a
subsumption, not equality, check against the context type.  e.g.

    data T = MkT (forall a. a->a)
      f :: forall b. [b]->[b]
      MkT f = blah

Since 'blah' returns a value of type T, its payload is a polymorphic
function of type (forall a. a->a).  And that's enough to bind the
less-polymorphic function 'f', but we need some impedance matching
to witness the instantiation.

# The main worker functions


### Note: Nesting

tcPat takes a "thing inside" over which the pattern scopes.  This is partly
so that tcPat can extend the environment for the thing_inside, but also
so that constraints arising in the thing_inside can be discharged by the
pattern.

This does not work so well for the ErrCtxt carried by the monad: we don't
want the error-context for the pattern to scope over the RHS.
Hence the getErrCtxt/setErrCtxt stuff in tcMultiple


### Note: NPlusK patterns

From

  case v of x + 5 -> blah

we get

  if v >= 5 then (\x -> blah) (v - 5) else ...

There are two bits of rebindable syntax:
  (>=) :: pat_ty -> lit1_ty -> Bool
  (-)  :: pat_ty -> lit2_ty -> var_ty

lit1_ty and lit2_ty could conceivably be different.
var_ty is the type inferred for x, the variable in the pattern.

### Note: Case branches must be taus

Note that we need to type-check the literal twice, because it is used
twice, and may be used at different types. The second HsOverLit stored in the
AST is used for the subtraction operation.


### Note: Hopping the LIE in lazy patterns

In a lazy pattern, we must *not* discharge constraints from the RHS
from dictionaries bound in the pattern.  E.g.
        f ~(C x) = 3
We can't discharge the Num constraint from dictionaries bound by
the pattern C!

So we have to make the constraints from thing_inside "hop around"
the pattern.  Hence the captureConstraints and emitConstraints.

The same thing ensures that equality constraints in a lazy match
are not made available in the RHS of the match. For example
        data T a where { T1 :: Int -> T Int; ... }
        f :: T a -> Int -> a
        f ~(T1 i) y = y
It's obviously not sound to refine a to Int in the right
hand side, because the argument might not match T1 at all!

Finally, a lazy pattern should not bind any existential type variables
because they won't be in scope when we do the desugaring

# Most of the work for constructors is here
        (the rest is in the ConPatIn case of tc_pat)


# matching indexed data types]

Consider the following declarations:

  data family Map k :: * -> *
  data instance Map (a, b) v = MapPair (Map a (Pair b v))

and a case expression

  case x :: Map (Int, c) w of MapPair m -> ...

As explained by [Wrappers for data instance tycons] in MkIds.hs, the
worker/wrapper types for MapPair are

  $WMapPair :: forall a b v. Map a (Map a b v) -> Map (a, b) v
  $wMapPair :: forall a b v. Map a (Map a b v) -> :R123Map a b v

So, the type of the scrutinee is Map (Int, c) w, but the tycon of MapPair is
:R123Map, which means the straight use of boxySplitTyConApp would give a type
error.  Hence, the smart wrapper function boxySplitTyConAppWithFamily calls
boxySplitTyConApp with the family tycon Map instead, which gives us the family
type list {(Int, c), w}.  To get the correct split for :R123Map, we need to
unify the family type list {(Int, c), w} with the instance types {(a, b), v}
(provided by tyConFamInst_maybe together with the family tycon).  This
unification yields the substitution [a -> Int, b -> c, v -> w], which gives us
the split arguments for the representation tycon :R123Map as {Int, c, w}

In other words, boxySplitTyConAppWithFamily implicitly takes the coercion

  Co123Map a b v :: {Map (a, b) v ~ :R123Map a b v}

moving between representation and family type into account.  To produce type
correct Core, this coercion needs to be used to case the type of the scrutinee
from the family to the representation type.  This is achieved by
unwrapFamInstScrutinee using a CoPat around the result pattern.

Now it might appear seem as if we could have used the previous GADT type
refinement infrastructure of refineAlt and friends instead of the explicit
unification and CoPat generation.  However, that would be wrong.  Why?  The
whole point of GADT refinement is that the refinement is local to the case
alternative.  In contrast, the substitution generated by the unification of
the family type list and instance types needs to be propagated to the outside.
Imagine that in the above example, the type of the scrutinee would have been
(Map x w), then we would have unified {x, w} with {(a, b), v}, yielding the
substitution [x -> (a, b), v -> w].  In contrast to GADT matching, the
instantiation of x with (a, b) must be global; ie, it must be valid in *all*
alternatives of the case expression, whereas in the GADT case it might vary
between alternatives.

RIP GADT refinement: refinements have been replaced by the use of explicit
equality constraints that are used in conjunction with implication constraints
to express the local scope of GADT refinements.


### Note: Matching constructor patterns

Suppose (coi, tys) = matchExpectedConType data_tc pat_ty

 * In the simple case, pat_ty = tc tys

 * If pat_ty is a polytype, we want to instantiate it
   This is like part of a subsumption check.  Eg
      f :: (forall a. [a]) -> blah
      f [] = blah

 * In a type family case, suppose we have
          data family T a
          data instance T (p,q) = A p | B q
       Then we'll have internally generated
              data T7 p q = A p | B q
              axiom coT7 p q :: T (p,q) ~ T7 p q

       So if pat_ty = T (ty1,ty2), we return (coi, [ty1,ty2]) such that
           coi = coi2 . coi1 : T7 t ~ pat_ty
           coi1 : T (ty1,ty2) ~ pat_ty
           coi2 : T7 ty1 ty2 ~ T (ty1,ty2)

   For families we do all this matching here, not in the unifier,
   because we never want a whisper of the data_tycon to appear in
   error messages; it's a purely internal thing


### Note: Arrows and patterns

(Oct 07) Arrow notation has the odd property that it involves
"holes in the scope". For example:
  expr :: Arrow a => a () Int
  expr = proc (y,z) -> do
          x <- term -< y
          expr' -< x

Here the 'proc (y,z)' binding scopes over the arrow tails but not the
arrow body (e.g 'term').  As things stand (bogusly) all the
constraints from the proc body are gathered together, so constraints
from 'term' will be seen by the tcPat for (y,z).  But we must *not*
bind constraints from 'term' here, because the desugarer will not make
these bindings scope over 'term'.

The Right Thing is not to confuse these constraints together. But for
now the Easy Thing is to ensure that we do not have existential or
GADT constraints in a 'proc', and to short-cut the constraint
simplification for such vanilla patterns so that it binds no
constraints. Hence the 'fast path' in tcConPat; but it's also a good
plan for ordinary vanilla patterns to bypass the constraint
simplification step.

### Note: Pattern coercions

In principle, these program would be reasonable:

        f :: (forall a. a->a) -> Int
        f (x :: Int->Int) = x 3

        g :: (forall a. [a]) -> Bool
        g [] = True

In both cases, the function type signature restricts what arguments can be passed
in a call (to polymorphic ones).  The pattern type signature then instantiates this
type.  For example, in the first case,  (forall a. a->a) <= Int -> Int, and we
generate the translated term
        f = \x' :: (forall a. a->a).  let x = x' Int in x 3

From a type-system point of view, this is perfectly fine, but it's *very* seldom useful.
And it requires a significant amount of code to implement, because we need to decorate
the translated pattern with coercion functions (generated from the subsumption check
by tcSub).

So for now I'm just insisting on type *equality* in patterns.  No subsumption.

Old notes about desugaring, at a time when pattern coercions were handled:

A SigPat is a type coercion and must be handled one at at time.  We can't
combine them unless the type of the pattern inside is identical, and we don't
bother to check for that.  For example:

        data T = T1 Int | T2 Bool
        f :: (forall a. a -> a) -> T -> t
        f (g::Int->Int)   (T1 i) = T1 (g i)
        f (g::Bool->Bool) (T2 b) = T2 (g b)

We desugar this as follows:

        f = \ g::(forall a. a->a) t::T ->
            let gi = g Int
            in case t of { T1 i -> T1 (gi i)
                           other ->
            let gb = g Bool
            in case t of { T2 b -> T2 (gb b)
                           other -> fail }}

Note that we do not treat the first column of patterns as a
column of variables, because the coerced variables (gi, gb)
would be of different types.  So we get rather grotty code.
But I don't think this is a common case, and if it was we could
doubtless improve it.

Meanwhile, the strategy is:
        * treat each SigPat coercion (always non-identity coercions)
                as a separate block
        * deal with the stuff inside, and then wrap a binding round
                the result to bind the new variable (gi, gb, etc)

# \subsection{Errors and contexts}


### Note: Existential check

Lazy patterns can't bind existentials.  They arise in two ways:
  * Let bindings      let { C a b = e } in b
  * Twiddle patterns  f ~(C a b) = e
The pe_lazy field of PatEnv says whether we are inside a lazy
pattern (perhaps deeply)

### Note: Typechecking pattern bindings